Emotional
The key part of the TED format is that we have humans
connecting to humans in a direct and almost vulnerable way.
You’re on stage naked, so to speak. The talks that work best are
the ones where people can really sense that humanity. The
emotions, dreams, imagination.
—CHRIS ANDERSON, CURATOR, TED
1.
Unleash the Master Within
Passion is the thing that will help you create the highest expression
of your talent.
—LARRY SMITH, TEDx, NOVEMBER 2011
AIMEE MULLINS HAS 12 PAIRS of legs. Like most people she was
born with two, but unlike most people Mullins had to have both legs
amputated below the knee due to a medical condition. Mullins has lived
with no lower legs since her first birthday.
Mullins grew up in a middle-class family in the middle-class town of
Allentown, Pennsylvania, yet her achievements are far from ordinary.
Mullins’s doctors suggested that an early amputation would give her the
best chance to have a reasonable amount of mobility. As a child Mullins
had no input into that decision, but as she grew up she refused to see herself
as or to accept the label most people gave her—“disabled.” Instead, she
decided that prosthetic limbs would give her superpowers that others could
only dream of.
Mullins redefines what it means to be disabled. As she told comedian and
talk-show host Stephen Colbert, many actresses have more prosthetic
material in their breasts than she does in her whole body, “and we don’t call
half of Hollywood disabled.”
Mullins tapped her superpower—her prosthetic limbs—to run track for an
NCAA Division One program at Georgetown University. She broke three
world records in track and field at the 1996 Paralympics, became a fashion
model and an actress, and landed a spot on People magazine’s annual list of
the 50 Most Beautiful People.
In 2009 the 5'8" Mullins stood on the TED stage at 6'1" the height she chose
for the occasion. Mullins picks different legs to suit the event. She uses
more-functional limbs for walking the streets of Manhattan and morefashionable
ones for fancy parties.
“TED literally was the launch pad to the next decade of my life’s
exploration,”1 said Mullins. Mullins believes her TED appearance began a
conversation that profoundly changed the way society looks at people with
disabilities. Innovators, designers, and artists outside the traditional
prosthetic medical community were inspired to see how creative and
lifelike they could make legs. “It is no longer a conversation about
overcoming deficiency. It’s a conversation about potential. A prosthetic
limb doesn’t represent the need to replace loss anymore … So people that
society once considered to be disabled can now become the architects of
their own identities and indeed continue to change those identities by
designing their bodies from a place of empowerment … it is our humanity,
and all the potential within it, that makes us beautiful.”
Mullins’s determination made her a world-class athlete; her passion won the
hearts of the TED audience.
Secret #1: Unleash the Master Within
Dig deep to identify your unique and meaningful connection to your
presentation topic. Passion leads to mastery and your presentation is
nothing without it, but keep in mind that what fires you up might not be the
obvious. Aimee Mullins isn’t passionate about prosthetics; she’s passionate
about unleashing human potential.
Why it works: Science shows that passion is contagious, literally. You
cannot inspire others unless you are inspired yourself. You stand a much
greater chance of persuading and inspiring your listeners if you express an
enthusiastic, passionate, and meaningful connection to your topic.
* * *
IN OCTOBER 2012, CAMERON RUSSELL told a TEDx audience,
“Looks aren’t everything.”2 Cliché? Yes, if it had been delivered by anyone
else. Russell, however, is a successful fashion model. Within thirty seconds
of taking the stage Russell changed her outfit. She covered her revealing,
tight-fitting black dress with a wraparound skirt, replaced her eight-inch
heels with plain shoes, and pulled a turtleneck sweater over her head.
“So why did I do that?” she asked the audience. “Image is powerful, but
also image is superficial. I just totally transformed what you thought of me
in six seconds.”
Russell explained that she’s an underwear model who has walked runways
for Victoria’s Secret and has appeared on the covers of fashion magazines.
While Russell acknowledges that modeling has been good to her—it paid
for college—she’s also keenly aware that she “won the genetic lottery.”
Russell showed the audience a series of before-and-after photos. The
“before” photos revealed what she looked like earlier in the day of a photo
shoot and the “after” photos displayed the final ad. Of course the two
photographs didn’t look at all alike. In one photo, Russell—16 years old at
the time—was seductively posed with a young man whose hand was placed
in the back pocket of her jeans (Russell had never even had a boyfriend at
the time of the shoot). “I hope what you’re seeing is that these pictures are
not pictures of me. They are constructions, and they are constructions by a
group of professionals, by hairstylists and makeup artists and photographers
and stylists and all of their assistants and preproduction and postproduction.
They build this. That’s not me.”
Russell is a master of her craft—modeling. But modeling is not what she’s
passionate about. She’s passionate about raising self-esteem in young girls,
and that’s why she connects with her audience. Passion is contagious. “The
real way that I became a model is I won a genetic lottery, and I am the
recipient of a legacy, and maybe you’re wondering what is a legacy. Well,
for the past few centuries we have defined beauty not just as health and
youth and symmetry that we’re biologically programmed to admire, but
also as tall, slender figures, and femininity and white skin. And this is a
legacy that was built for me, and it’s a legacy that I’ve been cashing in on.”
Russell’s looks made her a model; her passion made her a successful
speaker.
Russell and Mullins were given a platform because they are masters in their
fields, but they connect with their audiences because they are passionate
about their topics. What fuels a speaker’s passion does not always involve
their day-to-day work. Russell didn’t talk about posing for photographs, and
Mullins didn’t talk about competing in track and field. Yet each gave the
talk of her life.
The most popular TED speakers share something in common with the most
engaging communicators in any field—a passion, an obsession they must
share with others. The most popular TED speakers don’t have a “job.” They
have a passion, an obsession, a vocation, but not a job. These people are
called to share their ideas.
People cannot inspire others unless and until they are inspired themselves.
“In our culture we tend to equate thinking and intellectual powers with
success and achievement. In many ways, however, it is an emotional quality
that separates those who master a field from the many who simply work at a
job,”3 writes Robert Greene in Mastery. “Our levels of desire, patience,
persistence and confidence end up playing a much larger role in success
than sheer reasoning powers. Feeling motivated and energized, we can
overcome almost anything. Feeling bored and restless, our minds shut off
and we become increasingly passive.” Motivated and energized speakers
are always more interesting and engaging than bored and passive ones.
I’m often asked to work with CEOs on major product launches or
initiatives, helping them to tell their brand stories more effectively and
persuasively. I travel around the world to visit brands such as Intel, Coca-
Cola, Chevron, Pfizer, and many other companies in nearly every product
category. In any language, on any continent, in every country, those
speakers who genuinely express their passion and enthusiasm for the topic
are the ones who stand apart as inspiring leaders. They’re the ones with
whom customers want to conduct business.
For years I started with the same question during my coaching sessions with
a client—what are you passionate about? In the early stage of building a
story, I don’t care about the product as much as I care about why the
speaker is fired up about the product or service. Howard Schultz, the
founder of Starbucks, once told me he wasn’t passionate about coffee as
much as he was passionate about “building a third place between work and
home, a place where employees would be treated with respect and offer
exceptional customer service.” Coffee is the product, but Starbucks is in the
business of customer service. Tony Hsieh, the founder of online retailer
Zappos, isn’t passionate about shoes. He told me he’s passionate about
“delivering happiness.” The questions he asks himself are: How do I make
my employees happy? How do I make my customers happy? The questions
you ask will lead to a very different set of results. Asking yourself, “What’s
my product?” isn’t nearly as effective as asking yourself, “What business
am I really in? What am I truly passionate about?”
Tony Hsieh is so passionate about customer service and employee
engagement, he is a sought-after speaker at events and conferences around
the world (he has to turn down far more requests than he accepts). Since
many speakers are bone-dry because they have no passionate attachment to
the topic, watching an enthusiastic speaker is as refreshing as drinking icecold
water in the desert.
WHAT MAKES YOUR HEART SING?
Recently I’ve started to change the first question I ask of my executive
clients who want to become better communicators. In his last major public
presentation, Steve Jobs said, “It’s the intersection of technology and liberal
arts that makes our hearts sing.” So today I’ve replaced “What are you
passionate about” with “What makes your heart sing?” The answer to the
second question is even more profound and exciting than the former.
For example, I worked with a client in the agribusiness community of
California. He headed an association of strawberry growers, an important
crop for the state. Here’s how he answered my questions:
Question 1: What do you do? “I’m the CEO of the California Strawberry
Commission.”
Question 2: What are you passionate about? “I’m passionate about
promoting California strawberries.”
Question 3: What is it about the industry that makes your heart sing? “The
American dream. My parents were immigrants and worked in the fields.
Eventually they were able to buy an acre of land and it grew from there.
With strawberries, you don’t need a lot of land and you don’t need to own
it; you can lease it. It’s a stepping stone to the American dream.”
I’m sure you’ll agree that the answer to the third question is much more
interesting than the first two. What makes your heart sing? Identify it and
share it with others.
TEDnote
WHAT MAKES YOUR HEART SING? Ask yourself, “What makes my heart sing?”
Your passion is not a passing interest or even a hobby. A passion is something that is
intensely meaningful and core to your identity. Once you identify what your passion is,
can you say it influences your daily activities? Can you incorporate it into what you do
professionally? Your true passion should be the subject of your communications and will
serve to truly inspire your audience.
THE HAPPIEST MAN IN THE WORLD
Matthieu Ricard is the happiest man in the world, and he’s not happy about
it. In 2004 Matthieu Ricard temporarily left the Shechen monastery in
Kathmandu to teach a TED audience in Monterey, California the habits of
happiness.
According to Ricard, happiness is a “deep sense of serenity and
fulfillment.” Ricard should know. He’s not just pleased with his life. He’s
really, really happy. Scientifically, he’s off-the-charts happy. Ricard
volunteered for a study at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Research
scientists placed 256 tiny electrodes on Ricard’s scalp to measure his brain
waves. The study was conducted on hundreds of people who practice
meditation. They were rated on a happiness scale. Ricard didn’t just score
above average; the researchers couldn’t find anything like it in the
neuroscience literature. The brain scans showed “excessive activity in his
brain’s left prefrontal cortex compared to its right counterpart, giving him
an abnormally large capacity for happiness and a reduced propensity
towards negativity.”4
Ricard isn’t all that happy about being labeled the happiest man in the
world. “In truth, anyone can find happiness if he or she looks for it in the
right place,”5 he said. “Authentic happiness can only come from the longterm
cultivation of wisdom, altruism, and compassion, and from the
complete eradication of mental toxins, such as hatred, grasping, and
ignorance.”
Ricard’s presentation, “The Habits of Happiness,” attracted more than two
million views on TED.com. I believe Ricard’s presentation was well
received because Ricard radiates the joy of someone who is deeply
committed to his topic. Indeed, Ricard told me, “These ideas are dear to me
not only because they brought me a lot of fulfillment, but because I am
convinced that they can bring some good to society. I am particularly
passionate to show that altruism and compassion are not luxuries, but
essential needs to answer the challenges of our modern world. So, whenever
I am asked to join a conference, I am glad to do so and be able to share my
ideas.”6
Successful speakers can’t wait to share their ideas. They have charisma and
charisma is directly associated with how much passion the speaker has for
his or her content. Charismatic speakers radiate joy and passion; the joy of
sharing their experience and passion for how their ideas, products, or
services will benefit their audiences. “I believe that the best way to
communicate with anyone is to first check the quality of your motivation:
‘Is my motivation selfish or altruistic? Is my benevolence aimed at just a
few or at the great number? For their short-term or their long-term good?’
Once we have a clear motivation, then communication flows easily,” says
Ricard.
Amazingly, if your motivation is to share your passion with your audience,
it’s likely that you’ll feel less nervous about speaking in public or delivering
that all-important presentation in front of your boss. I asked Ricard how he
remains calm and relaxed in front of large audiences. Ricard believes that
anyone can talk him- or herself into feeling joy, bliss, and happiness when
they choose to do so. It all comes down to your motivation. If your only
goal is to make a sale or to elevate your stature, you might fail to connect
with your audience (and you’ll place a lot of pressure on yourself). If,
however, your goal is more altruistic—giving your audience information to
help them live better lives—you’ll make a deeper connection and feel more
comfortable in your role. “I am very happy to share ideas, but as an
individual I have nothing to lose or to gain,” said Ricard. “I don’t care about
my image, I have no business deal to cut, and I am not trying to impress
anyone. I am just full of joy to be able to say a few words about the fact that
we vastly underestimate the power of transforming the mind.”
WHY YOU WILL FAIL TO HAVE A GREAT CAREER
If you’re not happy and passionate about the work you do, you might fail to
have a great career, and if you’re not having a great time at a great career, it
will be harder for you to generate enthusiasm through your presentations.
That’s why career, happiness, and the ability to inspire people are
connected.
The topic of career success consumes University of Waterloo economics
professor Larry Smith. Smith is frustrated with today’s college students.
He’s upset because most college students will pursue specific careers for the
wrong reasons—money, status, etc. According to Smith, those students will
fail to have great careers. The only way to have a great career, says Smith,
is to do what you love. Smith channeled his frustration into an inspiring,
passionate, and humorous TEDx lecture, “Why You Will Fail to Have a
Great Career.”
I spoke to Smith about the popularity of his TED presentation, which at the
time of our discussion had been seen more than two million times. The
reaction surprised him. Smith agreed to do the talk at the request of his
students. Since his classes are usually three hours long, he took it as a
personal challenge to distill his ideas into 18 minutes. It was hugely popular
because the audience sees a speaker with unbridled passion and a sense of
urgency that makes his lecture riveting. Smith’s presentation was essentially
30 years of pent-up frustration reaching a boiling point. “Wasted talent is a
waste I cannot stand,”7 Smith told me. “My students want to create
technology. I want them to create really ‘kick-ass’ technology. I want them
to be passionate about what they’re doing.”
Smith’s premise is simple. There are plenty of bad jobs, he says. Those
“high-stress, blood-sucking, soul-destroying” jobs. Then there are great
jobs, but very little in between. Smith says most people will fail to land a
great job or enjoy a great career because they are afraid to follow their
passion. “No matter how many people tell you that if you want a great
career, pursue your passion, pursue your dreams … you will decide not to
do it.” Excuses, he says, are holding people back. His advice? “Find and use
your passion and you’ll have a great career. Don’t do it and you won’t.”
Smith was one of the most inspiring TED presenters I’ve met though I have
to admit that I may be a little biased. I’ve been preaching the same gospel
since the day I changed my plan to go to law school and pursued a career in
journalism instead. At first I didn’t earn nearly as much as I would have in
the legal profession, and I certainly had some doubts about my chosen
career path. Following your passion takes courage, especially if you don’t
see the results as quickly as you’d like. My life is vastly different today than
it was in those early years, and I enjoy sharing my ideas with audiences
around the world. Best of all, I don’t feel as though I “work.” Writing these
words, watching these presentations, studying the science behind them,
interviewing famous speakers, and sharing their thoughts with you is a
joyful experience for me. Above all, I’ve learned that those who are joyful
about their work often make the best public speakers.
“You’ve got to follow your passion. You’ve got to figure out what it is you love—who you
really are. And have the courage to do that. I believe that the only courage anybody ever
needs is the courage to follow your own dreams.”
—Oprah Winfrey
In his TEDx lecture Smith cited Steve Jobs’s famous commencement
speech at Stanford University in 2005 when Jobs encouraged the students to
pursue the path they really love. “Your work is going to fill a large part of
your life, and the only way to be truly satisfied is to do what you believe is
great work. And the only way to do great work is to love what you do. If
you haven’t found it yet, keep looking. Don’t settle. As with all matters of
the heart, you’ll know when you find it. And, like any great relationship, it
just gets better and better as the years roll on. So keep looking until you
find it. Don’t settle.”
Smith agrees with Jobs, but believes the advice often falls on deaf ears. “It
doesn’t matter how many times you download Steven J.’s Stanford
commencement address, you still look at it and decide not to do it,” Smith
told the TED audience. “You’re afraid to pursue your passion. You’re afraid
to look ridiculous. You’re afraid to try. You’re afraid you may fail.”
After spending a quarter century in journalism, writing, speaking, and
communications, I can tell you without hesitation that the most inspiring
presentations are delivered by people such as Larry Smith, Aimee Mullins,
and most of the other speakers you’ll meet in the chapters that follow. They
share a deep well of experience and a passionate commitment to sharing
their ideas to help others succeed.
TEDnote
ACCEPT HAPPINESS AS A CHOICE. What is one challenge you have been faced with
recently? After identifying your challenge, list three reasons why this challenge is an
opportunity. You see, happiness is a choice, an attitude that is contagious, and your state
of mind will positively affect the way your listeners perceive you. Matthieu Ricard told
me, “Our natural state of mind, when it is not misconstrued under the power of negative
thoughts, is perfection. It is essential to inspire hope and confidence, since it is what we
lack most and need most in our times.”
THE NEW SCIENCE OF PASSION AND PERSUASION
Passion and public speaking are intimately connected. French philosopher
Denis Diderot once said, “Only passions, great passions, can elevate the
soul to great things.” Successful leaders throughout history have speculated
that passions—great passions—can elevate the soul. Today science proves
them right. Neuroscientists have discovered—and have been able to
quantify—why passionate people like TED speakers and great leaders
inspire, energize, and influence other people.
Before we can create and deliver more-passionate presentations, we need to
understand what passion is and why it works. For ten years Pace University
management professor Melissa Cardon has made passion her passion. In her
breakthrough study “The Nature and Experience of Entrepreneurial
Passion,” Cardon, along with four research colleagues from prestigious
universities, found that passion plays a critical role in an entrepreneur’s
success. For one thing, passion mobilizes a person’s energy and enhances
his commitment to a goal. But passion does so much more. According to
Cardon, “Entrepreneurial passion catalyzes full-blown emotional
experiences, complete with engagement of brain and body responses.”8
Cardon began her research by developing a definition for entrepreneurial
passion. The common definition of passion simply didn’t lend itself to
academic studies and measurement. Passion is typically defined as “strong
amorous feelings” or “sexual desire”; not exactly the kind of passion
Cardon was interested in pursuing as an academic study. Yet “passion” is
thrown around constantly as a critical component of success and, I would
argue, is a critical element of all inspiring presentations.
What exactly does it mean to have a passion for something and, more
important, how can people harness their passion to improve their odds of
success in life, business, and public speaking? Cardon’s challenge was to
identify what passion means, what it does, and how to measure it.
Academically, if you can’t measure something you cannot quantify what it
actually does. In order to establish passion as a robust area of study, Cardon
had to develop a definition most scholars could agree on. Today, Cardon’s
definition of entrepreneurial passion (EP) is generally accepted in the
academic literature: “A positive, intense feeling that you experience for
something that is profoundly meaningful for you as an individual.”
Cardon says that passion is something that is core to a person’s self-identity.
It defines a person. They simply can’t separate their pursuit from who they
are. It’s core to their being. “Passion is aroused not because some
entrepreneurs are inherently disposed to such feelings but, rather, because
they are engaged in something that relates to a meaningful and salient selfidentity
for them.”
Cardon’s analysis helps explain why the most popular TED speakers
connect with their audiences: they speak about topics that are salient to their
self-identity. Take urban environmental consultant Majora Carter, for
example. Carter’s oldest brother served in Vietnam but was gunned down
near their home in the South Bronx. Poverty, hopelessness, and racial
divides made Carter who she is—a passionate advocate for urban renewal.
Her experience defined her, and it defines her work. According to
TED.com, “Carter’s confidence, energy and intensely emotional delivery
make her talks a force of nature.” For Majora Carter, raising the hopes of
those who have lost hope is core to who she is.
Entrepreneurship is core to Sir Richard Branson’s identity. In 2007 Branson
told a TED audience, “Companies are all about finding the right people,
inspiring those people, and drawing out the best in people. I just love
learning and I’m incredibly inquisitive and I love taking on the status quo
and trying to turn it upside down.”9 Building companies like Virgin Atlantic
that challenge the status quo is core to who he is. I spent a day with Richard
Branson on April 22, 2013. I had been invited to accompany him on the
inaugural flight of Virgin America’s new route from Los Angeles to Las
Vegas. On the ground and in the air, Branson was all smiles as he
enthusiastically talked about customer service and how it makes the
difference in the success of his brand.
Branson and Carter are engaged in activities that are intensely associated
with their role identities in a profoundly meaningful way. And it’s that
passion that plays a critical role in their career successes and their success
as communicators, according to Cardon.
“People who are genuinely passionate about their topic make better
speakers. They inspire their audiences in ways that nonpassionate, lowenergy
people fail to do,” Cardon told me. “When you are passionate about
something you can’t help yourself from thinking about it, acting on it, and
talking about it with other people.” Cardon says that investors, customers,
and other stakeholders are “smart consumers”: they know when a person is
displaying genuine passion and when he or she is faking it. It’s very
difficult—nearly impossible—to electrify an audience without feeling an
intense, meaningful connection to the content of your presentation.
PASSION—WHY IT WORKS
The next step for Cardon was to identify why passion matters. She found
that passion leads to important behaviors and outcomes. Cardon, along with
dozens of other scientists in the field, has discovered that passionate
business leaders are more creative, set higher goals, exhibit greater
persistence, and record better company performance. Cardon and her
colleagues also found a direct correlation between a presenter’s “perceived
passion” and the likelihood that investors will fund his or her ideas.
Professors Melissa Cardon, Cheryl Mitteness (Northeastern University),
and Richard Sudek (Chapman University) performed a remarkable
experiment and published their results in the September 2012 issue of the
Journal of Business Venturing. The researchers set out to understand the
role that passion plays in investor decision-making.
The business pitch is one of the most critical presentations in business.
Without funding, most ventures would never get off the ground. Companies
like Google and Apple would never have changed our lives if it hadn’t been
for charismatic, passionate leaders who grabbed the attention of investors.
Is passion the only criteria on which Apple and Google investors based
their funding decision? Of course not. Did the perceived passion of the
founders (Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, Sergey Brin, and Larry Page) play a
role in the investors’ ultimate funding decision? It certainly did.
The setting for Cardon’s study was one of the largest angel investor
organizations in America, Tech Coast Angels, based in Orange County,
California.10 Since 1997, the group of individual investors has invested
more than $100 million in nearly 170 companies. The sample involved
investors who did not invest as a group—they made their decisions
independently.
From August 2006 through July 2010, 64 angel investors screened 241
companies. The screening involved a 15-minute PowerPoint presentation
and a 15-minute question-and-answer session (later you’ll learn why 15 to
20 minutes is the ideal length of time to make a business pitch).
Forty-one (17 percent) of the companies were eventually funded. The
startups fell into 16 categories including software, consumer products,
medical devices, and business services. Using a five-point scale, angel
investors were asked to assess the passion and enthusiasm of the presenter
by evaluating two items: “The CEO is passionate about the company” and
“The CEO is very enthusiastic.” The researchers controlled for other factors
such as market opportunity, relative risk, and revenue potential, thereby
isolating passion as one factor in the funding decision. Isolating passion
allowed the researchers to quantify the role it played and they discovered
that passion did indeed play a very important role in the ultimate success of
a business pitch.
Investors based their judgment of the entrepreneur’s potential on 13 criteria
and were asked to rank each one in order of importance to their final
decision. The strength of the opportunity and the strength of the
entrepreneur were the most prized criteria, ranking numbers one and two.
“Perceived passion” came in third, well above such criteria as the
entrepreneur’s education, style, startup experience, or age.
The researchers concluded, “Our findings provide evidence that perceived
passion does make a difference when angels evaluate the funding potential
of new ventures … perceived passion involves enthusiasm and excitement,
and is distinct from how prepared or committed an entrepreneur may be to
their venture … perceived passion does appear to matter to equity
investors.”
Cardon’s research is essential for helping us understand why some TED
presentations become Internet sensations and, more important, how to
unleash our own public speaking potential.
“Carmine, you know the old adage we tell college students that they never
listen to—do what you love? Well, it’s true,” says Cardon. “If you’re
starting a company in an area that you think will make you rich, but you
don’t enjoy that product, industry, or anything about it—that’s a mistake.”
Cardon believes it’s also a mistake to believe that you can influence and
inspire others by speaking about a topic that you don’t love—that is not
core to your identity.
A FRONT-ROW SEAT TO HER OWN STROKE
Few TED speakers have as deep an emotional connection to their topic as
neuroanatomist Jill Bolte Taylor (Dr. Jill), a national spokesperson for the
Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center, which partly explains why her
presentation is one of the most popular TED talks of all time.
One morning Dr. Jill awoke to a pounding pain behind her left eye, the kind
of sharp jolt you might feel with an ice-cream headache. If only it had been
as innocuous as a bite of ice cream. The headache got worse. Dr. Jill lost
her balance and soon realized her right arm was completely paralyzed. A
blood vessel had ruptured in her head. She was having a stroke—the vessels
in the left side of her brain were literally exploding.
Dr. Jill considered the stroke a stroke of luck. You see, Dr. Jill is a
neuroanatomist, specializing in the postmortem investigation of the human
brain as it relates to severe mental illness. “I realized, ‘Oh my gosh! I’m
having a stroke! I’m having a stroke!’ The next thing my brain says to me
is, ‘Wow! This is so cool! How many brain scientists have the opportunity
to study their own brain from the inside out?’”11 she told a TED audience in
March 2008.
Dr. Jill’s stroke transformed her physically and spiritually. The stroke was
severe, leaving her unable to speak or move. It took years of rehabilitation
before she was able to recover partially. She didn’t give the TED
presentation until eight years after her stroke.
Dr. Jill’s spiritual awakening was profound. She connected to the world—
and to others—in a way that she had never experienced in her “left -brain”
world, where she saw herself as separate from the wider universe. Without
the chatter of her left brain and her inability to feel where her body began
and ended, her “spirit soared free.” She felt part of an expansive universe.
In short, she had reached Nirvana. “I remember thinking, there’s no way I
would ever be able to squeeze the enormousness of myself back into this
tiny little body.”
Dr. Jill’s stroke changed her life, as did her TED presentation. “My Stroke
of Insight,” a presentation based on her book of the same title published in
2008, has been viewed more than 10 million times. As a direct result of the
presentation, Dr. Jill was chosen as one of TIME magazine’s 100 Most
Influential People for 2008. In January 2013, Dr. Jill explained the
transformative impact of the presentation for a blog on the Huffington Post.
“Within weeks of delivering that talk in 2008, my life changed and the
repercussions still resonate loudly in my world. My book, My Stroke of
Insight, has been translated into 30 languages. TIME and Oprah’s Soul
Series came calling. I’ve traveled to Europe, Asia, South America, Canada;
I’ve crisscrossed the states. And in February 2012, I took a trip to
Antarctica with Vice President Al Gore, 20 scientists, and 125 global
leaders who care deeply about climate.”12
Dr. Jill had a great career, as Larry Smith would say, because she
discovered and pursued her life’s calling, well before the traumatic event
that would make her an inspiring speaker. Dr. Jill became a brain scientist
because her brother had been diagnosed with schizophrenia. “As a sister
and later, as a scientist, I wanted to understand, why is it that I can take my
dreams, I can connect them to my reality, and I can make my dreams come
true? What is it about my brother’s brain and his schizophrenia that he
cannot connect his dreams to a common and shared reality, so they instead
become delusion?”
I spoke to Dr. Jill about her presentation style—how she builds the story,
practices it, and delivers it. Dr. Jill’s advice to educators and
communicators: tell a story and express your passion. “When I was at
Harvard, I was the one winning the awards,” Dr. Jill told me. “I wasn’t
winning the awards because my science was better than anyone else’s. I was
winning the awards because I could tell a story that was interesting and
fascinating and it was mine, down to the detail.”
Dr. Jill’s deep connection with her topic cannot be separated from her
riveting ability to communicate with passion and, ultimately, change the
way her listeners see the world. If you find your topic fascinating and
interesting and wonderful, it’s more than likely your audience will, too.
YOUR BRAIN NEVER STOPS GROWING
Thanks to the study of neuroplasticity, scientists are finding that the brain
actually grows and changes throughout your life. The intense repetition of a
task creates new, stronger neural pathways. As a person becomes an expert
in a particular area—music, sports, public speaking—the areas of the brain
associated with those skills actually grow.
“We all get better at what we do if we do it repeatedly,”13 according to Dr.
Pascale Michelon, adjunct professor at Washington University in St. Louis.
Michelon told me about research that has been conducted on everyone from
taxi drivers to musicians. Compared to bus drivers, London taxi drivers had
a larger hippocampus in the posterior region of the brain. The hippocampus
has a specialized role in developing the skill used to navigate routes,
whereby the bus drivers’ hippocampi was understimulated because they
drove the same route day after day. Scientists also found that the gray
matter involved in playing music (motor regions, anterior superior parietal
and inferior temporal areas) was highest in professional musicians who
practiced one hour a day, intermediate in amateur musicians, and lowest in
nonmusicians. Learning a new skill and repeating the skills over and over
builds news pathways in the brain.
Michelon believes these studies also apply to people who speak repeatedly
on topics they’re passionate about. “The brain areas involved in language—
the areas that help you talk and explain ideas more clearly—these brain
areas become more activated and more efficient the more they are used. The
more you speak in public, the more the actual structure of the brain
changes. If you speak a lot in public, language areas of the brain become
more developed.”
Compelling communicators, like those TED presenters who attract the most
views online, are masters in a certain topic because of the inevitable amount
of devotion, time, and effort invested in their pursuit, which is primarily
fueled by fervent passion.
SECRETS OF INFECTIOUS PERSONALITIES
Psychologist Howard Friedman studies the most elusive of qualities:
charisma, a concept closely tied with passion. In The Longevity Project,
Friedman reveals the astonishing results of a groundbreaking study on the
subject.
First, Friedman devised a questionnaire meant to categorize low-charisma
individuals and high-charisma people. The survey includes questions such
as, “When I hear great music my body automatically starts moving to the
beat,”14 or, “At parties, I’m the center of attention,” and, “I am passionate
about the job I do.” The respondents had a range of options from “not very
true” to “very true.” The average score was 71 points (top scorers registered
about 117 points). The study separated the magnetic personalities from the
wallflowers. Friedman calls it the Affective Communications Test (ACT),
intended to measure how well people can send their feelings to others.
Friedman, however, took it one step further.
Friedman chose dozens of people who scored very high on the test and
others who scored very low. He then gave them a questionnaire and asked
them how they felt at the moment. High scorers and low scorers were then
placed in a room together. They sat in the room for two minutes and
couldn’t speak to one another. After the time was up they were asked to fill
out another questionnaire to gauge their mood. Without saying a word, the
highly charismatic individuals were able to affect the mood of the low
charismatics. If the highly charismatic person was happy, the low
charismatic would report being happier, too. It did not, however, work the
other way around. Charismatic people smiled more and had more energy in
their nonverbal body language. They exuded joy and passion.
Friedman’s study showed that passion does indeed rub off on others. People
who did not communicate emotionally (little eye contact, sitting stiffly, no
hand gestures) were not nearly as capable of influencing and persuading
others as high charismatics.
PASSION IS CONTAGIOUS, LITERALLY
Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, “Nothing great has ever been achieved
without enthusiasm.” Professors Joyce Bono at the University of Minnesota
and Remus Ilies at Michigan State University have proved Emerson right.
The business-school professors conducted four separate studies with
hundreds of participants to measure charisma, positive emotions, and
“mood contagion.”
The researchers found that “individuals who are rated high on charisma
tend to express more positive emotions in their written and spoken
communications.”15 Positive emotions include passion, enthusiasm,
excitement, and optimism. Bono and Ilies also discovered that positive
emotions are contagious, lifting the moods of the participants in the
audience. Participants who listened and watched positive leaders in person
and on video experienced a more positive mood than those who watched
leaders rated low for positive emotions. Further, positive leaders were
perceived as more effective and therefore more likely to persuade their
followers to do what they want their followers to do.
“Results of our study clearly indicate that leaders’ emotional expressions
play an important role in the formation of followers’ perceptions of leader
effectiveness, attraction to leaders, and follower mood. Our results also
suggest that charismatic leadership is linked to organizational success
because charismatic leaders enable their followers to experience positive
emotions. More importantly, our results indicate that the behavior of leaders
can make a difference in the happiness and well-being of the followers by
influencing their emotional lives.”
It’s been said that success doesn’t lead to happiness; happiness creates
success. The most popular TED speakers reflect the truth of that aphorism.
How you think—the confidence you have in your expertise, the passion you
have for your topic—directly impacts your communications presence.
Thoughts change your brain chemistry, shaping what you say and how you
say it.
“When you are inspired by some great purpose, some extraordinary project, all your
thoughts break their bonds. Your mind transcends limitations, your consciousness
expands in every direction, and you find yourself in a new, great, and wonderful world.
Dormant forces, faculties, and talents become alive, and you discover yourself to be a
greater person by far than you ever dreamed yourself to be.”
—Patanjali, an Indian teacher often called the Father of Yoga.
When you’re passionate about your topic—obsessively so—the energy and
enthusiasm you display will rub off on your listeners. Don’t be afraid to
express yourself—your authentic self. If you’re inspired like Dr. Jill, share
it. If you’re frustrated like Larry Smith, say so. If you’re happy like
Matthieu Ricard, express it.
TEDnote
INVITE PASSIONATE PEOPLE INTO YOUR LIFE. Starbucks founder Howard
Schultz once told me, “When you’re surrounded by people who share a collective passion
around a common purpose, anything is possible.” Identifying your passion is one step,
but you must share it, express it, and talk about what motivates you with the colleagues,
clients, and other people in your life. Most important, link yourself with others who
share your passion. Leaders use passion as a hiring criteria. Richard Branson hires
people with the Virgin attitude: they smile a lot, are positive and enthusiastic. As a result,
they are better communicators. It’s not enough to be passionate yourself. You must also
surround yourself with people who are passionate about your organization and the field
in which they’re working. Your ultimate success as a leader and communicator will
depend on it.
500 TEDSTERS CAN’T BE WRONG
Richard St. John was on a plane on his way to a TED conference when a
teenager sitting next to him, curious about his work, asked, “What really
leads to success?” St. John didn’t have a good answer, but he had a good
idea—he would ask the successful leaders attending and speaking at the
TED conference. He interviewed 500 TEDsters over the next decade and
uncovered the traits that made them ultra-successful. St. John revealed his
findings in a three-minute presentation at TED Monterey, 2005.
In a presentation viewed more than four million times, St. John delivered
“The 8 Secrets of Success.” The number-one “secret”? You got it—passion.
“TEDsters do it for love; they don’t do it for money,”16 St. John said.
In his book by the same title, St. John writes about Mullins, whom I opened
this chapter with, “Passion has enabled Aimee Mullins to set running
records, even though she’s missing two essential limbs for running—legs …
she’s well named since ‘Aimee’ comes from the French word ‘love’ and it’s
a big reason for her success on the track and in life. No wonder she says, ‘If
it’s your passion then inevitably you’ll succeed.’”
WANT TO HELP SOMEONE? SHUT UP AND LISTEN
Dr. Ernesto Sirolli, founder of the Sirolli Institute and a world-renowned
economic-development expert, learned the hard way that we is a more
powerful word than I. Sirolli, who got his start in sustainable development
by doing aid work in Africa in the early 1970s, told a TEDx audience in
2012 that what many “experts” knew about sustainable development has
turned out to be wrong.
At the age of 21, he worked for an Italian NGO and “every single project
that we set up in Africa failed.”17 Sirolli’s first project was to teach villagers
in southern Zambia to grow tomatoes. “Everything in Africa grew
beautifully. We had these magnificent tomatoes … we were telling the
Zambians, ‘Look how easy agriculture is.’ When the tomatoes were nice
and ripe and red, overnight, some 200 hippos came out from the river and
they ate everything. [Laughter] And we said to the Zambians, ‘My God, the
hippos!’ And the Zambians said, ‘Yes, that’s why we have no agriculture
here.’ [Laughter]
“‘Why didn’t you tell us?’ ‘You never asked.’”
If you want to help someone, shut up and listen. That’s what Sirolli learned
from his early experience in sustainable agriculture. “You never arrive in a
community with any ideas,” he said. Instead, he recommends, capture the
passion, energy, and imagination of the people living in that community.
As we’ve discussed, passion is the foundation of success in business, in
careers, and in public speaking. As it turns out, passion is the crucial
ingredient of success in Sirolli’s work, too. “You can give somebody an
idea. If that person doesn’t want to do it, what are you going to do? The
passion that the person has for her own growth is the most important thing.
The passion that that man has for his own personal growth is the most
important thing. And then we help them to go and find the knowledge,
because nobody in the world can succeed alone. The person with the idea
may not have the knowledge, but the knowledge is available.” You’re
reading this because you have a passion for personal growth. You’ve
probably mastered (or are close to mastering) the topic on which you speak.
Don’t be afraid to share your excitement. It will rub off on your audience.
“It is our experience that the very best executives are the ones who are the most
passionate about what they do.”
—Ron Baron, billionaire investor
Secret #1: Unleash the Master Within
I can teach you how to tell a story. I can teach you how to design a gorgeous
PowerPoint slide. I can even teach you how to use your voice and body
more effectively. Effective stories, slides, and body language are important
components of a persuasive presentation, yet they mean little if the speaker
isn’t passionate about his or her topic. The first step to inspiring others is to
make sure you’re inspired yourself. The simplest way to identify that which
you are truly passionate about is to ask yourself the question I raised earlier
in the chapter: “What makes my heart sing?” Once you discover that which
makes your heart sing, the stories you tell, the slides you use, and the way
you deliver your content will come to life. You will connect with people
more profoundly than you ever thought possible. You will have the
confidence to share what you’ve learned as a true master. That’s when
you’ll be ready to give the talk of your life.
2.
Master the Art of Storytelling
“Stories are just data with a soul.”
—BRENÉ BROWN, TEDx HOUSTON 2010
BRYAN STEVENSON’S GRANDMOTHER WAS THE end of every
argument in his family’s household. She was also the beginning of a lot of
arguments! Above all, she taught Stevenson about the power of identity.
Stevenson is a civil rights attorney and the executive director of the Equal
Justice Initiative, a nonprofit group that provides legal representation to
poor defendants who have been denied fair treatment in the criminal justice
system. Stevenson won a landmark Supreme Court case that barred states
from imposing mandatory life sentences without parole on juveniles
convicted of a felony. The justices ruled five-to-four that such sentences
were unconstitutional, violating the Eighth Amendment ban on cruel and
unusual punishment.
In September 2011, the Roosevelt Institute awarded Stevenson a Freedom
Medal for his work in the area of social justice. A representative from the
TED conference was in the audience and asked Stevenson to give a
presentation at the March 2012 event in Long Beach. Stevenson told me he
didn’t know much about TED at the time and was inclined to turn down the
invitation because he had two Supreme Court cases to argue at the end of
March. His staff “went ballistic” and told Stevenson that he had to speak at
TED. Stevenson is glad he did. The TED audience was so inspired by
Stevenson’s presentation they donated a combined $1 million to his
nonprofit.
Over the course of 18 minutes, Stevenson held the audience spellbound as
he told stories of several people who had influenced his life: his
grandmother, Rosa Parks, and a janitor. Stevenson began with a story about
his grandmother’s parents, who were born into slavery, and the experience
of how slavery shaped the way she saw the world. She had 10 children, and
it was difficult for Stevenson to find time with her. One day, when
Stevenson was eight or nine, his grandmother walked across the room, took
him by the hand, and said, “Come on, Bryan. You and I are going to have a
talk.”1 Stevenson said he would never forget the discussion that happened
next.
She sat me down and she looked at me and she said, “I want you to
know I’ve been watching you.” And she said, “I think you’re special.”
She said, “I think you can do anything you want to do.” I will never
forget it. And then she said, “I just need you to promise me three
things, Bryan.” I said, “Okay, Mama.” She said, “The first thing I want
you to promise me is that you’ll always love your mom.” She said,
“That’s my baby girl, and you have to promise me now you’ll always
take care of her.” Well I adored my mom, so I said, “Yes, Mama. I’ll
do that.” Then she said, “The second thing I want you to promise me is
that you’ll always do the right thing even when the right thing is the
hard thing.” And I thought about it and I said, “Yes, Mama. I’ll do
that.” Then finally she said, “The third thing I want you to promise me
is that you’ll never drink alcohol.”
Well I was nine years old, so I said, “Yes, Mama. I’ll do that.”
[Laughter]
A few years later, Stevenson was in the backwoods near his house with two
of his siblings who insisted that he take a sip of beer. Stevenson pushed
back and said he didn’t feel right about it. “And then my brother started
staring at me. He said, ‘What’s wrong with you? Have some beer.’ Then he
looked at me real hard and he said, ‘Oh, I hope you’re not still hung up on
that conversation Mama had with you.’ And when I asked him what he was
talking about said, ‘Oh, Mama tells all the grandkids that they’re special.’”
2.1: Bryan Stevenson, speaking at TED 2012. Courtesy of James Duncan Davidson/TED
(http://duncandavidson.com).
(Laughter.)
I was devastated.
(More laughter.)
Stevenson lowered his voice and said, “I’m going to tell you something I
probably shouldn’t. I know this might be broadcast broadly. But I’m 52
years old, and I’m going to admit to you that I’ve never had a drop of
alcohol. I don’t say that because I think that’s virtuous; I say that because
there is power in identity. When we create the right kind of identity, we can
say things to the world around us that they don’t actually believe makes
sense. We can get them to do things that they don’t think they can do.”
The audience, most of whom had been laughing at Stevenson’s story about
his grandmother, suddenly grew silent as they took in his words. He was
reaching their minds, but he could do that only after he had touched their
hearts.
Secret 2: Master the Art of Storytelling
Tell stories to reach people’s hearts and minds
Why it works: Bryan Stevenson, the speaker who earned the longest
standing ovation in TED history, spent 65 percent of his presentation telling
stories. Brain scans reveal that stories stimulate and engage the human
brain, helping the speaker connect with the audience and making it much
more likely that the audience will agree with the speaker’s point of view.
BREAK DOWN THE WALL WITH STORIES
Stevenson spoke for five minutes before he introduced his first statistics
about how many people are incarcerated in U.S. prisons and the percentage
of those who are poor and/or African-American. Data supported his thesis,
but a story took up the first one-third of his presentation. It wasn’t just any
story, either. Stevenson purposely chose to tell a story that made it easy for
his audience to connect with him on a personal and emotional level.
“You have to get folks to trust you,”2 Stevenson told me. “If you start with
something too esoteric and disconnected from the lives of everyday people,
it’s harder for people to engage. I often talk about family members because
most of us have family members that we have a relationship to. I talk about
kids and people who are vulnerable or struggling. All of those narratives are
designed to help understand the issues.”
Stevenson talks to many people who have made up their minds to disagree
with him well before he says a word. Narrative—storytelling—can help
break down the wall between him and the people he needs to persuade.
Stevenson says he tells stories to engage judges, jurors, and other decision
makers who are inclined to disagree with his perspective. Stevenson has
discovered that narrative is the most powerful way to break down
resistance.
Stevenson’s TED talk is a brilliant example of storytelling because he
connected each story to the central theme of “identity.” His last story
involved a janitor whom he’d met briefly on his way to a court
appointment. Once inside court, the conversation between Stevenson and
the judge got especially heated. Stevenson picks up the story.
Out of the corner of my eye, I could see this janitor pacing back and
forth. He kept pacing back and forth. And finally, this older black man
with this very worried look on his face came into the courtroom and
sat down behind me, almost at counsel table. About 10 minutes later
the judge said we would take a break. And during the break there was
a deputy sheriff who was offended that the janitor had come into court.
And this deputy jumped up and he ran over to this older black man. He
said, “Jimmy, what are you doing in this courtroom?” And this older
black man stood up and he looked at that deputy and he looked at me
and he said, “I came into this courtroom to tell this young man, keep
your eyes on the prize, hold on.”
Stevenson concluded the presentation by telling the TED audience that they
cannot be fully evolved human beings until they care about human rights
and basic dignity. “Our visions of technology and design and entertainment
and creativity have to be married with visions of humanity, compassion, and
justice. And more than anything, for those of you who share that, I’ve
simply come to tell you to keep your eyes on the prize, hold on.”
Stevenson’s audience rose to their feet because his stories had connected
with them. He had touched their souls.
Ben Affleck: Director’s Notes
Actor/director Ben Affleck considers Stevenson’s presentation among his favorite TED
talks. Affleck has seen many presentations, lectures, and talks about social justice, yet it
was Stevenson’s conversation—and it was more of a conversation than a formal
presentation—that left an indelible impression on Affleck. “Human rights lawyer Bryan
Stevenson shares some hard truths about America’s justice system … these issues, which
are wrapped up in America’s unexamined history, are rarely talked about with this level
of candor, insight and persuasiveness.”3
—Ben Affleck
When I spoke with Stevenson, I said, “Your subject is sensitive,
controversial, and complex,” and I asked him, “How much of your success
do you owe to the effective communication of your story?”
“Almost all of it. There are so many presumptions that will condemn the
clients I care about, so my task is to overcome the narratives that have
evolved. Almost all of what we’re trying to do turns on effective
communication. You need data, facts, and analysis to challenge people, but
you also need narrative to get people comfortable enough to care about the
community that you are advocating for. Your audience needs to be willing
to go with you on a journey.”
In my interview with Stevenson he validated the core concept in my
communications coaching—storytelling is the ultimate tool of persuasion.
Brands, as well as individuals, who tell stories—emotional and genuine
stories—connect with their customers and audiences in far deeper and
more-meaningful ways than do their competitors. Stevenson’s observation
should give you confidence, too. Many business professionals are
intimidated to tell personal stories in a PowerPoint presentation, especially
if the content contains data, charts, and graphs. But if Stevenson, a speaker
who successfully argues cases in front of Supreme Court justices, can find
power in stories, then the rest of us should take a cue from his experience.
POWER IN PATHOS
Stevenson has pathos. The Greek philosopher Aristotle is one of the
founding fathers of communication theory. He believed that persuasion
occurs when three components are represented: ethos, logos, and pathos.
Ethos is credibility. We tend to agree with people whom we respect for their
achievements, title, experience, etc. Logos is the means of persuasion
through logic, data, and statistics. Pathos is the act of appealing to
emotions.
Bryan Stevenson’s presentation contained 4,057 words. I analyzed those
words and assigned them into each of the three categories. If Stevenson
talked about his work in prisons, I placed that sentence or paragraph in the
category Ethos. When Stevenson delivered statistics, I added those
sentences to the category Logos. If Stevenson told a story, I placed the
content under Pathos. The results are shown in the pie chart in figure 2.2.
2.2: Pie Chart: Percentage of Ethos, Logos and Pathos, represented in Bryan Stevenson's TED
2012 presentation. Created by Empowered Presentations @empoweredpres.
As you can see, Ethos made up only 10 percent of Stevenson’s content, and
Logos only 25 percent. Pathos made up a full 65 percent of Stevenson’s
talk. Remarkably, Stevenson’s talk has been voted one of the most
“persuasive” on TED.com. To “persuade” is defined as influencing
someone to act by appealing to reason. Emotion doesn’t appear in the
definition, yet without the emotional impact of stories, Stevenson’s talk
would have failed to have the influence it’s had.
You simply cannot persuade through logic alone. Who says so? Some of the
most logical minds in the world.
TEDnote
HOW DO YOU USE ARISTOTLE’S COMPONENTS OF PERSUASION? Take one of
your recent presentations and categorize the content into one of the three categories we
just covered: Ethos (credibility), Logos (evidence and data), and Pathos (emotional
appeal). How does your pathos stack up against the rest? If your emotional appeal is
minimal, you might want to rethink your content before you give this presentation again,
like adding more stories, anecdotes, and personal insights.
YOUR BRAIN ON STORIES
Dale Carnegie believed in the power of stories to inspire audiences. “The
great truths of the world have often been couched in fascinating stories,”
Carnegie wrote. Carnegie once said, “The ideas I stand for are not mine. I
borrowed them from Socrates. I swiped them from Chesterfield. I stole
them from Jesus. And I put them in a book. If you don’t like their rules
whose would you use?”
Many of the ideas in this book do not belong to me. They do not belong to
TED. They do not belong to the awe-inspiring speakers who gave the
presentations. The techniques work because they are based on how the
human mind works; how it processes and recalls information and how that
information gets stamped in our brains. Carnegie based his advice on
intuition. Today we have brain scans to prove him right. Scientists using
functional MRI (fMRI) images have studied brain activity by tracking
changes in blood flow. In the last 10 years we’ve learned more about the
human brain than in all of the combined years humans have been on Earth,
and much of that research has direct implications for those who seek to
excel in the area of public speaking and communications.
STORIES PLANT IDEAS AND EMOTIONS INTO A
LISTENER’S BRAIN
In a darkened conference room on the campus of Princeton University,
someone is watching a Charlie Chaplin movie to give the rest of us a deeper
insight into how the brain processes information. Uri Hasson, assistant
professor of psychology at Princeton, is the psychologist conducting the
experiment for the Princeton Neuroscience Institute.
Hasson’s experiments include activities such as watching movies or
listening to stories while his subjects are connected to fMRI machines to
study their brain waves. Hasson wants to learn how the brain processes
complex information. Hasson and his colleagues have discovered that
personal stories actually cause the brains of both storyteller and listener to
sync up. Sync up is my term; Hasson calls it “brain-to-brain coupling.”
Hasson and his colleagues recorded the brain activity of a speaker telling
unrehearsed stories. Next, they measured the brain activity of the person
listening to the story and asked the listener to fill out a detailed
questionnaire to measure comprehension. The results are among the first of
their kind in the area of neuroscience. The researchers found that the
speaker’s and the listener’s brains “exhibited joint, temporally coupled,
response patterns.”4 To put it simply, “The listener’s brain responses
mirrored the speaker’s brain responses.” There was actually a mind-meld
between the speaker and the listener.
Hasson chose a graduate student to be the speaker. Lauren Silbert told a
personal story about going to her prom. Researchers scanned her brain and
the brains of the 11 students who were listening. The same parts of
everyone’s brain showed “activation,” meaning a deep connection between
the person doing the talking and the person doing the listening. It also
suggested that everyone in the room—all the listeners—was experiencing a
similar response! The “coupling” did not occur when the listeners were told
a story in Russian, a language they didn’t know.
“When the woman spoke English, the volunteers understood her story, and
their brains synchronized. When she had activity in her insula, the region in
the brain responsible for emotion, the listeners did too. When her frontal
cortex lit up, so did theirs. By simply telling a story, the woman could plant
ideas, thoughts, and emotions into the listeners’ brains,”5 reports Hasson.
Researchers have discovered that our brains are more active when we hear
stories. A wordy PowerPoint slide with bullet points activates the languageprocessing
center of the brain, where we turn words into meaning. Stories
do much more, using the whole brain and activating language, sensory,
visual, and motor areas.
Hassan’s findings are profoundly important for anyone who needs to deliver
a presentation with the intent of influencing behavior. If stories trigger
brain-to-brain “coupling,” then part of the solution to winning people over
to your argument is to tell more stories.
STORIES ARE JUST DATA WITH A SOUL
In June 2010, Brené Brown delivered the talk “The Power of Vulnerability”
at TEDx Houston. As a research professor at the University of Houston,
Brown studies vulnerability, courage, authenticity, and shame. It’s a pretty
big subject area to squeeze into 18 minutes, yet Brown did it so well that
her presentation has been viewed more than seven million times. Brown
began her presentation with a short anecdote.
A couple of years ago, an event planner called me because I was going
to do a speaking event. And she called, and she said, “I’m really
struggling with how to write about you on the little flier.” And I
thought, “Well, what’s the struggle?” And she said, “Well, I saw you
speak, and I’m going to call you a researcher, I think, but I’m afraid if
I call you a researcher, no one will come because they’ll think you’re
boring and irrelevant.” And I was like, “Okay.” And she said, “But the
thing I liked about your talk is you’re a storyteller. So I think what I’ll
do is just call you a storyteller.”6
Brown said the “insecure” part of her was hesitant to adopt the title because
she was a serious academic researcher. However, she eventually warmed to
the idea. “I thought, you know, I am a storyteller. I’m a qualitative
researcher. I collect stories; that’s what I do. Maybe stories are just data
with a soul. And maybe I’m just a storyteller.” As Brown suggests, we’re
all storytellers. You’re telling stories every day. In a business presentation,
you’re telling the story behind your campaign, company, or product. In a
job interview, you’re telling the story behind your personal brand. In a
marketing pitch, you’re telling the story about your idea. Yes, we’re all
storytellers and we’re telling stories in business each and every day.
I’ll never forget the one time I received a severe reprimand from my
professor at the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern. I had
returned from an assignment empty-handed. “There was no story,” I told
my instructor. He got so angry that I thought he would blow a blood vessel
in his forehead. “There’s always a story!” he yelled. I always recall that
encounter when I hear someone say, “I don’t have a story.” Sure you do.
There’s always a story. All you have to do is look, and if you look hard and
smart enough, you’ll be sure to find a good one.
“We all love stories. We’re born for them. Stories affirm who we are. We all want
affirmations that our lives have meaning. And nothing does a greater affirmation than
when we connect through stories. It can cross the barriers of time, past, present and
future, and allow us to experience the similarities between ourselves and through others,
real and imagined.”7
—Andrew Stanton, writer of “Toy Story,” TED February 2012
THREE SIMPLE, EFFECTIVE TYPES OF STORIES
Inspiring communicators and the best TED presenters stick to one of three
types of stories. The first are personal stories that relate directly to the
theme of the conversation or presentation; second are stories about other
people who have learned a lesson the audience can relate to; third are
stories involving the success or failure of products or brands.
Personal Stories
Stories are central to who we are. The most popular TED presentations start
with a personal story. Recall the touching stories Bryan Stevenson told
about his grandmother and the janitor who gave him an energizing piece of
advice: “keep your eyes on the prize.” The ability to tell a personal story is
an essential trait of authentic leadership—people who inspire uncommon
effort. So, tell personal stories. What are your fondest memories of a loved
one? You probably have a story to tell about that person. My daughters
enjoy hearing stories of their grandfather (their “nonno”) who was held
captive in World War II, how he tried to escape, and how he and my mom
eventually emigrated to America with $20 in their pocket. Stories like this
one are central to our identity as a family. I’m sure it’s the same for you.
If you’re going to tell a “personal” story, make it personal. Take the
audience on a journey. Make it so descriptive and rich with imagery that
they imagine themselves with you at the time of the event.
A Burn Unit Inspires a Career and a Groundbreaking
Presentation
Professor of psychology and behavioral economist at Duke University and
bestselling author Dan Ariely develops clever studies to demonstrate why
people make predictably irrational decisions. His interest in the subject
started in the burn unit with his personal story. “I was burned very badly.
And if you spend a lot of time in hospitals, you’ll see a lot of types of
irrationalities. And the one that particularly bothered me in the burn
department was the process by which the nurses took the bandage off me,”8
Ariely told a TED audience in 2009.
In graphic detail he explained how bandages could be ripped off quickly or
slowly. If you’re like most people—and Ariely’s nurses—you probably
assume it’s better to strip off the bandages quickly to get the pain over with.
It took the nurses one hour to rip off the bandages. Ariely, in massive pain,
pleaded with the nurses to take two hours instead of one, making the pain
less intense. The nurses said they knew best and Ariely had to endure the
pain.
Ariely left the hospital three years later (70 percent of his body had been
burned) and entered a Tel Aviv University. There he examined the question
of how to take bandages off burn patients. “What I learned was that the
nurses were wrong. Here were wonderful people with good intentions and
plenty of experience, and nevertheless they were getting things wrong
predictably all the time. It turns out that because we don’t encode duration
in the way that we encode intensity, I would have had less pain if the
duration would have been longer and the intensity was lower.”
Ariely also uses a very effective storytelling technique—unexpectedness. In
Made to Stick, Dan and Chip Heath reveal several elements of a “sticky”
idea, one that people remember. According to the Heaths, “The most basic
way to get someone’s attention is this: Break a pattern.”9 Curiosity and
mystery are powerful ways to get our attention. For evidence, the Heaths
cite George Loewenstein’s work at Carnegie Mellon University. “Curiosity,
he says, happens when we feel a gap in our knowledge … gaps cause pain.
When we want to know something but don’t, it’s like having an itch that we
need to scratch. To take away the pain, we need to fill the knowledge gap.
We sit patiently through bad movies, even though they may be painful to
watch, because it’s too painful not to know how they end.”10
Ariely’s personal story is made more effective because its outcome is
unexpected. Tell personal stories, but choose them carefully. A personal
experience that led to an unexpected result often makes for a particularly
compelling story.
Mom’s Personal Fiscal Cliff
Personal stories grab attention in nearly every communications format—
presentations, social media, and television interviews. I started my
journalism career in 1989, the last year Ronald Reagan was in office.
Reagan was called the Great Communicator because he could wrap his
message in a story. When I left day-to-day journalism to start my own
communications practice, I remembered the quality that gave Reagan his
charisma—his ability to tell a story.
Today I give CEOs and politicians the same advice: if you want to be
quoted, tell a story, and the more personal the better. It works nearly every
time. For example, in December 2012, the U.S. media was obsessed about
the “fiscal cliff,” a combination of automatic spending cuts and tax
increases that would have gone into effect had lawmakers failed to reach a
budget deal. A new member of Congress called me about one hour before a
scheduled television interview. He wanted to run some messages by me. All
I heard were “talking points” so I politely suggested he tell stories instead.
We decided that he should tell a story about his mother, a nurse, and how
the fiscal cliff would impact her. The congressman told the story, the
reporter aired the story, and the politician used it for every one of his
subsequent interviews. Sometimes the congressman was successful in
getting his talking points across; other times he was not. His mother,
however, always made the cut.
People love stories. Business professionals rarely tell personal stories,
which is one reason why they make such an impact when they do. Today
when I coach CEOs for press interviews or major presentations, I always
encourage them to incorporate a personal story. Reporters and bloggers who
cover the event include the story nearly every time. No technique is 100
percent guaranteed, but telling personal stories comes close.
Stories about Other People
Sir Ken Robinson, a PhD and thought leader in the area of creativity and
innovation in education and business, says schools kill creativity. Millions
of people clearly agree with him or have found his argument so provocative
that they feel compelled to view and share his 2006 TED talk. It’s the most
popular TED talk of all time (14 million views at the time of this writing).
I’m fascinated by Robinson’s presentation because he uses no PowerPoint,
no visuals, no props, yet he still connects with the audience. He does it
through the skillful use of analysis, data, humor, and storytelling.
Schools That Nurture (Not Undermine) Creativity
Robinson’s most intriguing and gripping story does not involve himself. Its
central character is someone whom Robinson had interviewed. Her name
was Gillian Lynne, and few in the audience had ever heard of her. They had,
however, heard of her work. Lynne was the choreographer behind Cats and
Phantom of the Opera. Robinson asked Lynne how she had become a
dancer. She said that when she was going to school in the 1930s, her school
administrators believed she had a learning disorder because she couldn’t
concentrate and was always fidgeting. “I think now they’d say she had
ADHD. Wouldn’t you? But this was the 1930s, and ADHD hadn’t been
invented at this point. It wasn’t an available condition. People weren’t
aware they could have that,”11 Robinson said dryly as the audience laughed.
Robinson continued the story with Lynne’s visit to a specialist whom her
mother had brought her to see. After listening to Lynne and her mother for
about 20 minutes, the doctor told Lynne that he would like to speak to her
mother privately. “But as they went out of the room, he turned on the radio
that was sitting on his desk. And when they got out of the room, he said to
her mother, ‘Just stand and watch her.’ And the minute they left the room,
she said, she was on her feet, moving to the music. And they watched for a
few minutes, and he turned to her mother and said, ‘Mrs. Lynne, Gillian
isn’t sick; she’s a dancer. Take her to a dance school.’” Lynne did go to
dance school. She had a career at the Royal Ballet, met Sir Andrew Lloyd
Webber, and has been responsible for choreographing some of the greatest
musicals in the history of theater.
Robinson uses the story as a setup to the conclusion of his presentation and
to reinforce his theme: “What TED celebrates is the gift of the human
imagination. We have to be careful now that we use this gift wisely and that
we avert some of the scenarios that we’ve talked about. And the only way
we’ll do it is by seeing our creative capacities for the richness they are and
seeing our children for the hope that they are. And our task is to educate
their whole being, so they can face this future.”
Robinson’s call to “educate their whole being” would be hard for the
audience to fully comprehend had he not told the story of Gillian Lynne.
Abstractions are difficult for most people to process. Stories turn abstract
concepts into tangible, emotional, and memorable ideas.
A TED-worthy Preacher Tells Stories from the Pulpit
Lakewood Church pastor Joel Osteen has never given a TED talk, but he
gives a TED-worthy performance every week to 40,000 people who attend
his sermons in person and another seven million who watch him on
television.
In TED fashion, Osteen always begins a sermon with a theme. He started
one sermon, “I want to talk to you today about how ‘Yes Is in Your
Future.’12. He followed with a short anecdote about a friend of his. The
friend had been working hard for years. One day a supervisor retired and
several people were up for the job. Osteen’s friend had seniority and had
been faithful to the company, yet he was turned down for the promotion in
favor of a younger and less-experienced person. The friend felt cheated but
“he didn’t get bitter or quit doing his best.” Two years later, a senior vice
president retired and Osteen’s friend got the promotion he deserved. “His
position now is many levels higher than that old supervisor position,”
Osteen said. “You might be in a ‘no’ right now but favor is coming. Healing
is coming. Promotion is coming. Say to yourself, ‘I’m not going to get
stuck in a no. I know a yes is coming.’”
After establishing pathos with the audience, Osteen turned to logos and
shared the following statistics with the audience. He said that 90 percent of
all first businesses fail. Ninety percent of all second businesses succeed, yet
80 percent of business owners never try a second time. “They failed to
realize that they were a few ‘no’s’ away from seeing their business
succeed.”
Osteen followed the statistics with many more stories. Characters included
biblical figures, people who attended Lakewood services, historical
personalities (Albert Einstein failed 2,000 times), and his own mother, who
was seated in the front row. Osteen told one story about a friend with a
reasonably successful small business. The friend wanted to expand and
went to the bank he had been doing business with for years. He had a
business plan and proven results. The bank turned him down. A second
bank turned him down. “Ten banks, then twenty banks … you’d think he’d
get the message,” Osteen said. “Thirty banks turned him down. Then
another one. Thirty-one banks said no. Then bank number thirty-two came
along and said, ‘We like your idea. We’ll take a chance on you.’ When God
puts a dream in your heart, you know you’re going to succeed. Every ‘no’
means you’re one step closer to ‘yes.’”
Personal stories are stories about yourself, but they can also be stories about
other people with whom the audience can empathize. Osteen shares a
quality with popular TED speakers: they are masters at creating empathy.
Empathy is the capacity to recognize and feel emotions experienced by
somebody else. We put ourselves in the shoes of the other. We’ve seen how
stories can help us “experience” someone else’s emotions. Some famous
neuroscientists believe we are hardwired for empathy, that it’s the social
glue that holds society together. In a presentation you can create empathy
by talking about yourself or someone else.
“The truthful, inside story of almost any man’s life—if told modestly and without
offending egotism—is most entertaining. It is almost sure-fire speech material.”
—Dale Carnegie
Stories about Brand Success
When I give a keynote presentation I tell personal stories, stories about
other individuals whom I know personally, have interviewed, or have read
about, and stories of brands that have successfully leveraged the business
strategy I’m discussing.
I’m always looking for stories for my columns and presentations. I find
them everywhere. I walked onto a Virgin America plane, talked to the
pilots, and was surprised to learn that they monitor the brands’ Twitter feed.
That led to a story about brands that use social media to have conversations
with their customers. When I stayed at a Ritz-Carlton hotel, I asked a waiter
why he gave me a free appetizer. He said, “I’m empowered to deliver a
great customer experience.” That led to several stories on employee
engagement and customer service. I walked into an Apple Store and
discovered that employees are trained to walk a customer through five steps
that either lead to a sale or promote brand loyalty. That experience led not
only to a story, I wrote an entire book about it. Brand stories are
everywhere.
Popular blogger and TED speaker Seth Godin also tells brand stories and
does so brilliantly. In February 2003 Godin taught the TED audience how to
get their ideas to spread. The video became a hit and has attracted more
than 1.5 million views. U2 lead singer Bono said it was his favorite TED
presentation. “Describing a revolution in media in the most unrevolutionary
terms, this talk is an understatement,”13 said Bono. “Godin is a smart, funny
dude.”
A Smart, Funny Dude with a Story to Tell
Godin tells three stories that support his theme: smart marketers promote
their products differently; ordinary is boring. Godin persuasively argues that
the riskiest thing to do is “be safe,” or average, and he uses short and simple
stories to do it.
In a story about Wonder Bread, Godin tells the audience:
This guy named Otto Rohwedder invented sliced bread, and he
focused, like most inventors did, on the patent part and the making
part. And the thing about the invention of sliced bread is this—that for
the first 15 years after sliced bread was available no one bought it; no
one knew about it; it was a complete and total failure. And the reason
is that until Wonder came along and figured out how to spread the idea
of sliced bread, no one wanted it. That the success of sliced bread, like
the success of almost everything we’ve been talking about at this
conference, is not always about what the patent is like, or what the
factory is like—it’s about can you get your idea to spread, or not.
In another story Godin showed a photo of a famous Frank Gehry–designed
building. “Frank Gehry didn’t just change a museum; he changed an entire
city’s economy by designing one building that people from all over the
world went to see. Now, at countless meetings at, you know, the Portland
City Council, or who knows where, they said, we need an architect—can
we get Frank Gehry? Because he did something that was at the fringes.”
Finally, here is how Godin told the story behind Silk soymilk: “Silk. Put a
product that does not need to be in the refrigerated section next to the milk
in the refrigerated section. Sales tripled. Why? Milk, milk, milk, milk, milk
—not milk. For the people who were there and looking at that section, it
was remarkable. They didn’t triple their sales with advertising; they tripled
it by doing something remarkable.”14
Godin’s stories all feature brands that are remarkable. The next time you see
Silk or Wonder Bread in the grocery store, you’ll think differently about the
brand and about the messages you use to stand out in the marketplace of
ideas.
Larger companies are discovering that stories put a human face on an otherwise faceless
conglomerate. Tostitos, Taco Bell, Domino’s Pizza, Kashi, McDonald’s, and Starbucks
are turning to commercials that highlight farmers who grow the ingredients behind their
products. People are more engaged with products when they know where those products
come from and if they get to know the real people behind those products. The Lush chain
of soap stores puts a small picture of a real employee on each product—the faces are
those of people who actually made the product. Lush believes that every product has a
story. There’s a reason why many successful brands spend millions on advertising that
includes real faces, real people, and real stories. It works.
A Rich Man’s Convenience and a Poor Man’s Lifesaver
Every product has a story, as does every startup entrepreneur who built
those products. Twenty-one-year-old Ludwick Marishane of Cape Town,
South Africa, was named the 2011 global student entrepreneur of the year
all because he didn’t want to take a bath. Marishane invented DryBath, the
world’s first non-water-based bath-substitute lotion.
If Marishane crafted an elevator pitch for his invention it would go
something like this: “DryBath is the world’s first and only bath-substituting
skin gel. You apply it to your skin and you don’t need to bathe.” What’s
missing? The why and the what. Why did he invent it and what’s the benefit
of it? Stories fill in the blanks.
At TED Johannesburg in May 2012, Marishane told a story to explain the
why and the what. “I grew up in Limpopo, in a little town called Motetema.
Water and electricity supply are as unpredictable as the weather and
growing up in these tough situations, at the age of 17, I was relaxing with a
couple of friends of mine in winter and we were sunbathing. The Limpopo
sun gets really hot in winter. As we were sunbathing, my best friend next to
me says, ‘Man, why doesn’t somebody invent something that you can just
put on your skin and then you don’t have to bathe?’ As I sat, I thought,
‘Man, I would buy that!’”15
Marishane went home, conducted research, and found “shocking” statistics.
He learned that over 2.5 billion people in the world do not have proper
access to sanitation, 5 million of whom are in South Africa. Horrible
diseases thrive in these environments. For example, trachoma blinds 8
million people every year. “The shocking part about it is that all you have to
do to prevent being infected with trachoma is wash your face,” Marishane
said. With nothing but a cell phone and very limited access to the Internet,
Marishane did the research and wrote a 40-page business plan. Four years
later he received a patent and DryBath was born. Its value proposition:
“DryBath is a rich man’s convenience and a poor man’s lifesaver.”
Every brand, every product, has a story. Find it and tell it.
What is a story? Jonah Sachs offers this definition in Winning the Story Wars: “Stories
are a particular type of human communication designed to persuade an audience of a
storyteller’s worldview. The storyteller does this by placing characters, real or fictional,
onto a stage and showing what happens to these characters over a period of time. Each
character pursues some type of goal in accordance with his or her values, facing
difficulty along the way, and either succeeds or fails according to the storyteller’s view of
how the world works.”16 Sachs believes that in the battlefield of ideas, marketers have a
secret weapon—a well-told story. Sachs says that contemporary audiences are so
bombarded by messages that they are more resistant and more skeptical than at any
other time in history. However, “These same audiences, when inspired, are willing and
able to spread their favorite messages, creating a massive viral effect for those who win
their love.”
Gladwell, Happiness, and Spaghetti Sauce
At the Monterey TED conference of February 2004, The Tipping Point
author, Malcolm Gladwell, told a simple story about Howard Moskowitz, a
man who became famous for reinventing spaghetti sauce. The title of the
presentation was “Choice, Happiness, and Spaghetti Sauce.”
The story went like this. Campbell’s Soup approached Moskowitz to help
the company make a spaghetti sauce that would compete against Ragu, the
dominant sauce of the 1970s and 1980s (Campbell’s made Prego). It seems
as though Prego was struggling despite being a higher-quality product.
Moskowitz worked with the company to create 45 varieties of spaghetti
sauce. He brought them on the road to have average consumers taste-test
each one.
If you sit down, and you analyze all this data on spaghetti sauce, you
realize that all Americans fall into one of three groups. There are
people who like their spaghetti sauce plain; there are people who like
their spaghetti sauce spicy; and there are people who like it extrachunky.
And of those three facts, the third one was the most
significant, because at the time, in the early 1980s, if you went to a
supermarket, you would not find extra-chunky spaghetti sauce. And
Prego turned to Howard, and they said, “You’re telling me that onethird
of Americans crave extra-chunky spaghetti sauce and yet no one
is servicing their needs?” And he said yes! And Prego then went back,
and completely reformulated their spaghetti sauce, and came out with a
line of extra-chunky that immediately and completely took over the
spaghetti sauce business in this country. And over the next 10 years,
they made 600 million dollars off their line of extra-chunky sauces.17
The entire food industry took notice of Moskowitz’s analysis. It’s why we
have “fourteen different kinds of mustards and seventy-one different kinds
of olive oil,” according to Gladwell. Ragu even hired Moskowitz and today
we have 36 varieties of Ragu spaghetti sauce. Gladwell told the Moskowitz
story in 10 minutes. He spent the remaining seven minutes offering the
lessons the story teaches us. For example, people don’t know what they
want and, if they do, they have a hard time articulating what they truly
desire.
Assumption number one in the food industry used to be that the way to
find out what people want to eat—what will make people happy—is to
ask them. And for years and years and years and years, Ragu and
Prego would have focus groups, and they would sit all you people
down, and they would say, “What do you want in a spaghetti sauce?”
And for all those years—20, 30 years—through all those focus group
sessions, no one ever said they wanted extra-chunky. Even though at
least a third of them, deep in their hearts, actually did.
Gladwell ended his presentation with what he called the most beautiful
lesson of all: “In embracing the diversity of human beings, we will find a
surer way to true happiness.”
Gladwell succeeds because he combines a “hero” story (which you’ll learn
more about later in this chapter) about a particular individual with a
successful brand story. Your audience wants someone or something to cheer
for. They want to be inspired. Give them a hero. Captivate their imagination
with stories about yourself, other people, or successful brands.
TEDnote
WHAT STORY CAN YOU INCLUDE? Think about a story (either personal, about
someone else, or related to a brand) that you can include in your communications or in
your next presentation. If you already do this, then you are one step closer to being a
TED-worthy communicator. In a business presentation, telling stories is the virtual
equivalent of taking people on a field trip, helping them to experience the content at a
much more profound level.
LEAD WITH STORIES AND SUCCEED IN BUSINESS
A well-told story gives leaders a strong advantage in today’s increasingly
competitive marketplace. A powerful narrative can persuade customers,
employees, investors, and stakeholders that your company, product, or idea
can help them achieve the success they desire.
We are all natural storytellers, but somehow we lose this part of ourselves
when we enter the corporate world. It’s especially true when we give
PowerPoint presentations. We fall into presentation mode and forget that the
most effective way of delivering information is through the emotional
connection of story. Stories make concepts and ideas real and tangible. “For
too long the business world has ignored or belittled the power of oral
narrative, preferring soulless PowerPoint slides, facts, figures, and data,”18
says Peter Guber, president of Mandalay Entertainment. Guber, who
produced such films as Batman and The Color Purple, wrote an entire book
on the power of storytelling titled Tell to Win. He adds, “But as the noise
level of modern life has become a cacophony, the ability to tell a purposeful
story that can truly be heard is increasingly in demand.”
Batman Producer Closes His Eyes for Magic
I’ve spoken to Guber about the power of story in presentations. As Guber
looked back on his successful entertainment career, he realized that much of
his success was attributed to his ability to persuade customers, employees,
shareholders, media, and partners through storytelling. Guber said he lost
big business deals because he threw potential investors a barrage of data,
stats, and forecasts while neglecting to engage with them emotionally. “To
succeed, you have to persuade others to support your vision, dream, or
cause. Whether you want to motivate your executives, organize your
shareholders, shape your media, engage your customers, win over your
investors, or land a job, you have to deliver a clarion call that will get your
listeners’ attention, emotionalize your goal as theirs, and move them to act
in your favor. You have to reach their hearts as well as their minds—and
this is just what storytelling does.”19
In the early 1990s an incident in Guber’s office made him realize that a
story—compellingly told—can persuade even the most hardened business
executive like himself. At the time, Guber was the CEO of Sony Pictures.
Magic Johnson and his business partner, Ken Lombard, visited Guber in his
office, and the first thing Lombard said was, “Close your eyes. We’re going
to tell you a story about a foreign country.”20 Guber thought it a little
“unorthodox,” but he shut his eyes and went along with it. Lombard
continued, “This is a land with a strong customer base, great location, and
qualified investors. You know how to build theaters in Europe, Asia, and
South America. You know how to invest in foreign countries that have
different languages, different cultures, different problems. What you do,
Peter, is you find a partner in the country who speaks the language, knows
the culture, and handles local problems. Right?” Guber nodded in
agreement as his eyes remained shut. “Well, what if I told you a promised
land exists that already speaks English, craves movies, has plenty of
available real estate, and no competition? This promised land is about six
miles from here.”
Lombard and Johnson were pitching Guber on building movie theaters in
underserved urban communities. Lombard and Johnson cast themselves as
the heroes of the narrative, the characters who would help Guber navigate
the waters to reach the promised land. In the first four weeks of opening,
the first Magic Johnson Theater was one of the top five highest-grossing
theaters in the Sony chain.
Guber reminded me that storytelling should be part of every discussion
intended to persuade a listener to back your idea—whether it’s a formal
presentation or a casual conversation. Guber says that as he looks back at
his 40 decades in business, his ability to persuade customers, employees,
shareholders, and partners through storytelling has been his single biggest
competitive advantage.
The Power of Words
Avoid overused buzzwords and clichés. Marketers love to use words such as leading,
solutions, and ecosystem. These words are empty, meaningless, and used so often they’ve
lost whatever punch they may once have had.
Overused metaphors can also be boring. According to a study featured in The New York
Times, “The way the brain handles metaphors has also received extensive study; some
scientists have contended that figures of speech like ‘a rough day’ are so familiar that
they are treated simply as words and no more.”21 Brain scans are revealing that when
people hear a detailed description, “an evocative metaphor or an emotional exchange
between characters,” different areas of the brain are stimulated. Just hearing “the smell
of lavender” activates the part of the brain involved in smell. “When subjects in their
laboratory read a metaphor involving texture, the sensory cortex, responsible for
perceiving texture through touch, became active. Metaphors like ‘The singer had a velvet
voice’ and ‘He had leathery hands’ roused the sensory cortex.” When you tell a story, by
all means use metaphors, analogies, and vivid language, but eliminate clichés,
buzzwords, and jargon. Your audience will tune out phrases they’ve heard a million
times.
Meet David and Susan
When Toshiba Medical Systems introduced a revolutionary new CT scan, I
met with a group of executives to help them shape the story for its global
launch. The three-dimensional views of the heart and brain that the machine
displayed were indeed impressive, but how could we give an equally
impressive presentation without drowning the audience in mind-numbing
data? We told a story.
At the press conference we introduced David and Susan, two people who
really didn’t exist but who did for the purposes of the launch. The
presentation demonstrated how this new piece of medical equipment could
dramatically cut down the time for doctors to make an accurate diagnosis,
thereby saving the lives of the two characters. We gave “David” and
“Susan” names, faces, and offered detailed information about their lives.
We wanted the audience to see themselves or their loved ones in the faces
presented on the screen. Physicians attending the conference later told the
speakers that the “David and Susan” part of the presentation was their
favorite sequence. It delivered information and made an emotional
connection at the same time. That’s what a powerful story can do.
You don’t have to be launching a revolutionary product like the iPhone or a
$2 million piece of medical equipment to tell a good story. During a job
interview, tell a personal story about your success managing a team or
executing a difficult project. In a new business pitch, share a story about
how your product helped a client increase sales despite the economic
downturn. During a product launch, tell a personal story behind the
product’s inception. You might be surprised at how many people remember
the stories you tell.
GIVE ME ONE CHARACTER I CAN ROOT FOR
The twentieth-century American writer Kurt Vonnegut was considered a
masterful storyteller. A video clip surfaced on the Internet that showed
Vonnegut explaining the shape of popular stories. Successful stories—those
that connect emotionally with most people—have simple shapes. To
illustrate, he drew two lines on a graph (see figure 2.3). On the y axis he
wrote I for “Ill Fortune” and the letter G for “Good Fortune.” On the x axis
he wrote the letter B for “Beginning” and the letter E for “End.”
A Story with a 2,700 Percent Return
Significantobjects.com is a Web site dedicated to the power of story. Significant Objects
was a social and anthropological experience devised by Rob Walker and Joshua Glenn.
The two researchers started with a hypothesis: a writer can invent a story about an
object, investing the object with subjective significance that raises its objective value. The
researchers curated objects from thrift stores and garage sales. The objects would cost no
more than a buck or two. The second phase of the experiment saw a writer create a
short, fictional story about the object. In the third step, the object was auctioned on eBay.
The researchers purchased $128.74 worth of objects. The thrift-store “junk” sold for a
total of $3,612.51. The men had discovered that narrative could invest ordinary objects
with extraordinary significance. A story had raised the average products’ prices by 2,700
percent. For example, a fake banana cost 25 cents and sold on eBay for $76 after a story
was added. A tiny miniature turkey dinner was acquired for free (the owner just wanted
it off the shelf) and sold for $30 after Jenny Offill wrote a creative story about it.
According to the Significant Objects site, “Stories are such a powerful driver of
emotional value that their effect on any given object’s subjective value can actually be
measured objectively.”22
He called the first story shape “Man in a Hole.” “Somebody gets into
trouble; gets out of it again. People love that story. They never get sick of
it!”23 The second story shape was called “Boy Gets Girl.” The story starts
with an average person on an average day and something good happening
to that person. Of course, the person comes close to losing the good fortune
and gets it back again to end the story happily. “People love that,” Vonnegut
said. He then said the last story shape was the most popular in Western
civilization. “Every time it’s retold, someone makes another million dollars.
You’re welcome to do it,” Vonnegut said with a smile.
2.3: Re-creation of Kurt Vonnegut’s story chart. Created by Empowered Presentations
@empoweredpres.
If you want to grip your audience, the story needs to start at the bottom of
the G–I access, with terrible misfortune. “Let’s start with a little girl. Her
mother has died. Her father has remarried a vile-tempered ugly woman with
two nasty daughters. You’ve heard it?” The audience roars with laughter as
they see that Vonnegut is outlining the Cinderella story arc. “There’s a party
at the palace that night and she can’t go.” After the fairy godmother helps
her get ready for the party and she meets a prince, the protagonist stumbles
again, slightly below the G–I line but not all the way to the bottom again.
As the story continues, the shoe fits, she marries the prince, and “achieves
off-scale happiness.”
Vonnegut’s writing advice: “give the reader at least one character he or she
can root for.”
I had Vonnegut’s storytelling table in mind when I worked with an
executive for Chase, a major U.S. bank, to help him prepare the content for
a keynote presentation he was asked to give for the United Way. He had
personally benefited from United Way programs, but the story he had
intended to tell was about his company’s commitment to the organization,
how much employees had contributed, etc. His early slides were also laden
with charts and figures. Good information, but not very emotional.
“Let’s forget the slides for a moment. Tell me about your personal
connection to United Way,” I said. What he said next caught me by surprise.
“I was two years old when my father abandoned the entire family. I was
four years old when my mom remarried and that’s when I learned the
definition of abuse. My first vivid memory was my mother lying in a pile of
glass and my stepfather standing over her threatening to cut her throat if she
didn’t do exactly what he said. I remember thinking, where is my father and
why is he allowing this man to do this to us?”
The executive went on to tell me how he grew into a very angry young
man. At the age of 25 he enrolled in a United Way agency and credited the
program for teaching him how to take control of his attitude and putting
him on the right path. It also taught him how to become a great father. “I’m
proud of the man I’ve become. I’m proud of what they taught me,” he said.
After the goose bumps subsided I encouraged the executive to throw out his
existing PowerPoint and open with stories and photographs. That’s exactly
what he did, showing a black-and-white picture of his biological father
holding him and his brother, pictures of his mother, followed by current
photographs of him and his family, “the man he had become.” This
executive received a standing ovation from his audience, brought many to
tears, and, after he repeated the presentation for an internal audience of
employees, elicited the largest employee contributions of any division
within his bank.
The United Way presentation I just described is an extreme example—I’m
not asking you to reveal all the skeletons in your family closet. I am urging
you, however, to embrace a personal story that has meaning to you and to
your topic, own it, and share it.
TEDnote
INTRODUCE HEROES AND VILLAINS. Whether it’s a movie or a novel, every great
story has a hero and a villain. A strong business presentation has the same cast of
characters. A spokesperson reveals a challenge (villain) facing a business or industry.
The protagonist (brand hero) rises to meet the challenge. Finally, the townspeople
(customers) are freed from the villain, the struggle is over, and everyone lives happily
ever after. In some cases the villain can be an actual person or competitor, but tread
carefully in these cases. Above all, make sure the hero—your product, your brand, or
your idea—comes in to save the day.
When TED invites people to speak at its annual conference, it sends out a
stone tablet with the 10 TED Commandments written on it. The fourth
commandment reads, Thou Shalt Tell a Story. The novelist Isabele Allende
didn’t need to be told. She makes a living writing stories about passion.
In Allende’s 2007 TED talk, she revealed the recipe for great characters.
“Nice people with common sense do not make interesting characters. They
only make good former spouses,”24 Allende said to a roomful of laughter.
“Passion lives here,” she continued. “Heart is what drives us and determines
our fate. That is what I need for my characters in my books: a passionate
heart. I need mavericks, dissidents, adventurers, outsiders and rebels, who
ask questions, bend the rules and take risks. People like all of you in this
room.”
Secret #2: Master the Art of Storytelling
Great speakers are indeed mavericks, adventurers, and rule-bending rebels
who take risks. They tell stories to express their passion for the subject and
to connect with their audiences. Ideas are the currency of the twenty-first
century and stories facilitate the exchange of that currency. Stories
illustrate, illuminate, and inspire.